Reduced Order Modeling with applications to gravitational waves
Dr. Manuel Tiglio
​
In these lectures I will present a high level overview of Reduced Basis (RB) for parameterized systems. This is the predominant approach for reduced order modeling, both for forward (simulations) and inverse (inference) problems and is based on an offline-online decomposition. In the offline stage one builds a reduced model to represent the truth one. If there are regularity conditions on parameter variation, the reduced model converges very fast with the number of bases, in most cases of interest to gravity, exponentially (as opposed to sub-linear in Montecarlo simulations). This involves approximation theory and it will be described why and how RB with a greedy approach is nearly optimal with respect to an optimal representation (the Kolmogorov n-width, an NP complex problem). The RB-greedy approach is of linear complexity and, among many advantages, embarrassingly parallel and hierarchical. Next, an agnostic, data-driven approach will be presented for a predictive, or surrogate model, which can be exactly equivalent (up to machine precision) to the truth one but with significan speedups. In binary black hole simulations this has shown a speedup factor of 11 orders of magnitude while being indistinguishable from supercomputer simulations, with the difference that it can run on a millisecond on a laptop or even on a smartphone (an app will be presented and distributed). Parameter estimation has been reduced from months/years of wall time computational time to hours, without loss of accuracy. While most literature on the topic focus on “certified” approaches for linear elliptic partial differential equations, the focus here will be on agnostic or data-driven ones, with the above demonstrated speedups, which can be applied to a large number of disciplines, from finances to biology and more.
An industrial-grade open source software on the works will be introduced.
A pressing need and current topic of cutting-edge research is to include stochastic components through generalized Polynomial Chaos (gPC) and merge it with RB. Another promising area that will be sketched is the combination of RB with manifold learning.
